---
layout: post
title: ISAG Conference in Cape Town, South Africa
date: 2023-07-10 15:59:00-0400
inline: false
related_posts: false
tags: conference, isag, 
categories: blog-posts
---

I and my colleagues Juha Kantanen, Melak Weldenegodguad, and Daniil Ruuvinskiy attended the 39th International Society for Animal Genetics Conference (2023) that was held in Cape Town, South Africa in July 2-7, 2023.

We were involved in the following abstracts.

OP117 Reference genome of the native Finnhorse as a tool to study the adaptation of northern Eurasian horse breeds. K. Pokharel, M. Honkatukia, C. Ginja, M. Weldenegodguad, J. Peippo, H. Lindeberg, T. Reilas and J. Kantanen.
Presenting author: K. Pokharel

OP115 The first Rangifer tarandus chromosomal phylogeny. E. Bozlak, K. Pokharel, M. Weldenegodguad, A. Paasivaara, J. Kantanen, and B. Wallner
Presenting author: E. Bozlak

P97   ISAG Bursary Award: Adipose gene expression profil of four cattle breeds highlight selective pressures and tissue functions. D. Ruvinskiy, K. Pokharel, A. Amaral, M. Weldenegodguad, M. Honkatukia1,3, H. Lindberg, J. Peippo1,3, P. Soppela, P. Uimari, C. Ginja6, and J. Kantanen.
Presenting author: D. Ruuvinskiy

OP112 ISAG Bursary Award: Temporal changes in genomic diversity of the northernmost cattle populations in Europe. M. Weldenegodguad, M. Kjetså, A. Blauer, A. M. Johansson, C. Sarmento, S. Guimarães, C. Ginja, M. Honkatukia, and J. Kantanen
Presenting author: M. Weldenegodguad

M. Weldenegodguad, D. Ruuvinskiy, and E. Bozlak received ISAG Bursary Award.

It was a very well organized conference. We had opportunity to explore the city of Cape Town and on the last day we went on a safari to see some wild animals. 

